Enzymes are [[Proteins]] and are biological [[Catalyst|catalysts]] that speed up metabolic chemical reaction withing living organisms and play a vital role in life. Some enzymes have non-protein elements
Substrates are the molecules that enzymes interact with to speed up reactions. Enzymes have a 3D active site which is part of the tertiary protein structure. This is where chemical reactions occur and substrates can interact with the enzyme. Enzymes only work with specific substrates, as they have an active site that has a fixed shape. Enzymes have [[Chiral Centres]], this is because they are made up of [[Amino Acids]]. This means that only one enantiomer in the substrate will fit into the active site. We say that the active sites are stereospecific
An inhibitor is a substance that has a similar shape to the substrate that fits into the active site of an enzyme. An inhibitor blocks the active site from a substrate to enter. The higher the concentration of inhibitor, the more active sites will be blocked, so the [[Rate of reaction]] decreases. Another factor to consider is how strongly the inhibitor binds to the active site. If it binds poorly, then the rate of reaction will not be reduced as much
Some drugs like antibiotics can work as inhibitors by blocking the active site of the enzyme that is responsible for making the cell wall of a bacteria cell. If the cell wall can't be made, then the bacteria cell wall will burst and die. As active sites are stereospecific, it can be difficult to find drugs that fit into the active site. If the drug is chiral, then only one of the enantiomers will work. When developing new drugs, trial and error is required. Scientists will try different inhibitors to see which work. To speed up drug development, scientists use computer modelling to design new drugs to act as inhibitors to fit specific active sites. Computer models allow scientists to test how a drug will respond by enzymes without making the drug. This is quicker and cheaper

#Chemistry #Organic #DNA 